.. _user-section-initial-path:

The initial-path section
========================

The ``initial-path`` section specifies how the initial
path for a TIS/RETIS simulation should be generated.

.. pyretis-input-example:: initial-path

   .. code-block:: rst

       Initial-path settings
       ---------------------
       method = kick
       kick-from = previous

The different methods may require different keywords and
this is described below for the following supported methods:

.. |kick| replace:: :ref:`kick <user-section-initial-path-kick>`

.. |load| replace:: :ref:`load <user-section-initial-path-load>`

.. |restart| replace:: :ref:`restart <user-section-initial-path-restart>`


.. _table-initial-methods:

.. table:: Supported initiation methods in |pyretis|
   :class: table-striped table-hover

   +---------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | Method name   | Description                                             |
   +===============+=========================================================+
   | |kick|        | For initiating new trajectories from given initial      |
   |               | configuration(s).                                       |
   +---------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | |load|        | For loading previously generated frames/trajectories    |
   +---------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
   | |restart|     | For restarting |pyretis| simulations.                   |
   +---------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

**Choosing a method.**
Use |restart| whenever a ``pyretis.restart`` file is available — it is the
most faithful continuation and requires no extra setup.
Use |load| when you have a molecular dynamics trajectory or a previous run
whose restart files are unavailable or whose settings need to change beyond
what a restart allows; PyRETIS handles the distribution of frames across
ensembles automatically.
Use |kick| when no prior trajectory exists and paths must be generated from
scratch.

|

.. _user-section-initial-path-kick:

The kick method
---------------

The kick method generates initial paths for all path ensembles from scratch,
requiring only a single starting configuration from the user.  It is
recommended when no prior trajectory is available.

For each ensemble, the method searches for a crossing of the ensemble's
middle interface :math:`\lambda_i` starting from a given phase point
:math:`x`:

1. Velocities are randomised (e.g. drawn from a Maxwell–Boltzmann
   distribution).

2. The equations of motion are integrated one step forward.  This gives a
   new phase point :math:`y`.

3. If :math:`y` is closer to :math:`\lambda_i` than :math:`x`, the update
   :math:`x \leftarrow y` is accepted and the steps are repeated.
   Otherwise, the steps are repeated from :math:`x` unchanged.

When a crossing is found, two phase points are available: one immediately
before the interface and one immediately after.  A full path is then
generated by integrating forward from the point after the interface and
backward from the point before it.

**Efficient ensemble population with** ``kick-from = previous``.
With ``kick-from = initial`` every ensemble is kicked from the same
user-provided configuration, which may require many iterations for ensembles
whose interface lies far from the starting point.  With
``kick-from = previous`` (recommended for RETIS) only the *first* ensemble
is kicked from the provided configuration.  For each subsequent ensemble
PyRETIS automatically selects the frame from the just-generated path that
lies closest to the next interface and is still to the left of it, then
kicks from that frame.  This propagates the starting point progressively
through interface space so that the kicking algorithm is always seeded close
to the target interface, greatly reducing the number of iterations needed
per ensemble and requiring no additional input from the user.


Keywords for the kick method
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the ``kick`` method, the following keywords can be set:

.. |kick_method| replace:: :ref:`method <user-section-initial-kick-method>`
.. |kick_from| replace:: :ref:`kick-from <user-section-initial-kick-kick-from>`

.. _table-kick-method:

.. table:: Keywords for the kick method.
   :class: table-striped table-hover

   +---------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
   | Keyword       | Description                                              |
   +===============+==========================================================+
   | |kick_method| | Selects the kick method.                                 |
   +---------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
   | |kick_from|   | Modify how the initial point for the kick method is      | 
   |               | picked.                                                  |
   +---------------+----------------------------------------------------------+


.. _user-section-initial-kick-method:

Keyword method
..............

.. pyretis-keyword:: method kick
   :specific: yes

   The ``method`` keyword selects the kick initialization.

.. _user-section-initial-kick-kick-from:

Keyword kick-from
.................

.. pyretis-keyword:: kick-from string

   The ``kick-from`` keyword specifies what initial point we use
   for the kick method. This setting is used when several path ensembles are
   initiated at the same time. It can be set to:

   * ``kick-from = initial``: In which we will kick from the initial configuration provided.
     That is, all path ensembles are initiated from the same starting point.

   * ``kick-from = previous``: In which we kick from the point on the previous path which is
     closest to the next interface and still left of this interface. The first path ensemble will be
     initiated using the provided initial configuration for the particles.

   Default:
       The default value is ``kick-from = initial``.

|

.. _user-section-initial-path-load:

The load method
---------------

The ``load`` method initialises path ensembles from existing trajectory data,
avoiding the need to generate paths from scratch via kicking.  It is the
recommended starting point whenever a prior molecular dynamics trajectory or
a previous (P)RETIS run is available.

How ensembles are populated
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

PyRETIS maps each path ensemble to a numbered subfolder inside
``load_folder`` (``000``, ``001``, ``002``, …, matching the ensemble
numbering used during the simulation).  For each ensemble in turn the
following steps are applied:

1. **Collect frames.**  Trajectory or configuration files are read from the
   load folder (see :ref:`user-section-initial-load-layouts` below for the
   two supported layouts).

2. **Recompute the order parameter.**  The order parameter is *always*
   recomputed from atomic positions using the order parameter function
   defined in the simulation input.  If an ``order.txt`` file is present it
   is used as-is; if it is absent it is generated and written to disk.  This
   design means users can change the order parameter definition without
   regenerating their trajectory files.

3. **Validate and clean the path.**  Only frames relevant to the ensemble
   are kept; the rest are discarded (see
   :ref:`user-section-initial-load-cleaning` below).

4. **Fall back to kick if needed.**  If no valid path can be assembled from
   the loaded data and ``load_and_kick = True``, PyRETIS automatically kicks
   from the frame nearest to the ensemble's middle interface.

.. _user-section-initial-load-cleaning:

Path validation and cleaning
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After collecting frames PyRETIS checks whether the assembled sequence
constitutes a formally valid path for the target ensemble.  If it does not,
the following recovery steps are attempted in order:

1. Frames are **sorted by order parameter** and the validation is repeated.
2. If sorting alone is insufficient, the sequence is **mirrored** to produce
   an L-to-L or R-to-R path — a valid bookkeeping form that satisfies the
   ensemble definition.
3. Frames outside the ensemble's relevant region are **discarded**, keeping:

   * the two frames immediately before and after the first interface, and
   * all frames between the interface defining the ensemble and the last
     interface.

   If this second group is empty, the frame with the highest order parameter
   is retained so that the ``load_and_kick`` fallback has a useful seed.

If all three steps fail and ``load_and_kick = False``, PyRETIS raises an
error.

.. _user-section-initial-load-layouts:

Load folder layouts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Two layouts are supported.

**Layout 1 — unformatted (single shared trajectory).**
Place one or more trajectory or configuration files directly in
``load_folder`` (accepted formats: ``.xyz``, ``.gro``, ``.trr``, ``.g96``,
plain-text ``.txt``).  PyRETIS will:

* distribute the files to each ensemble subfolder,
* generate ``traj.txt`` (frame index list) automatically,
* recompute and write ``order.txt`` using the order parameter function.

Only the frames relevant to each ensemble survive path cleaning.  Use this
layout when you have a single long trajectory and want PyRETIS to handle
the per-ensemble distribution automatically with minimal user effort.

**Layout 2 — formatted (per-ensemble subfolders).**
Create subfolders ``000``, ``001``, ``002``, … inside ``load_folder`` and
place the relevant files for each ensemble there.  If ``traj.txt`` or
``order.txt`` are absent they are regenerated automatically.

For *internal engines* (positions and velocities stored in PyRETIS format):

+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| File          | Notes                                                     |
+===============+===========================================================+
| ``traj.txt``  | Required.  Full path (positions and velocities).          |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``order.txt`` | Optional.  Recomputed from atomic positions if absent.    |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``energy.txt``| Optional.  Energies are silently ignored if absent.       |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+

For *external engines* (GROMACS, CP2K, …):

+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| File / folder     | Notes                                                  |
+===================+========================================================+
| ``traj.txt``      | Required.  Frame index file referencing MD files.      |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| ``accepted/``     | Required.  Actual MD trajectory files (``.trr``,       |
|                   | ``.gro``, ``.xtc``, ``.g96``, ``.xyz``, …) referenced  |
|                   | in ``traj.txt``.                                       |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| ``order.txt``     | Optional.  Recomputed from atomic positions if absent. |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
| ``energy.txt``    | Optional.  Energies are silently ignored if absent.    |
+-------------------+--------------------------------------------------------+

Use Layout 2 when different ensembles should start from different
trajectories, or when you want to resume from formatted output of a previous
(P)RETIS run with changed settings (and no restart file is available).

.. note::

   **Order parameters are always recomputed from atomic positions** using the
   order parameter function defined in the simulation input.  Placing an
   ``order.txt`` file in the load folder is a performance shortcut, not a
   requirement.  If it is absent or outdated, PyRETIS regenerates it
   automatically.  This allows users to change the order parameter definition
   without regenerating trajectory files.

Keywords for the load method
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the load method, the following keywords can be set:

.. |load_method| replace:: :ref:`method <user-section-initial-load-method>`
.. |load_and_kick| replace:: :ref:`load_and_kick <user-section-initial-load-and-kick>`
.. |load_folder| replace:: :ref:`load_folder <user-section-initial-load-load-folder>`

.. _table-keyword-load:

.. table:: Keywords for the load method.
   :class: table-striped table-hover

   +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
   | Keyword         | Description                                            |
   +=================+========================================================+
   | |load_method|   | Selects the load method.                               |
   +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
   | |load_and_kick| | Fall back to kick initialisation when loaded data      |
   |                 | cannot form a valid path.                              |
   +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------+
   | |load_folder|   | Directory containing the trajectory data to load.      |
   +-----------------+--------------------------------------------------------+

.. _user-section-initial-load-method:

Keyword method
..............

.. pyretis-keyword:: method load
   :specific: yes

   The ``method`` keyword selects the load initialization.

.. _user-section-initial-load-and-kick:

Keyword load_and_kick
.....................

.. pyretis-keyword:: load_and_kick boolean

   When ``load_and_kick = True``, the loaded trajectory data is used as a
   pool of candidate frames rather than as a ready-made path.  If the loaded
   frames cannot be assembled into a valid path for the target ensemble —
   even after sorting and mirroring — PyRETIS:

   1. Selects the frame from the loaded data that is closest to the
      ensemble's middle interface.
   2. Uses this frame as the starting configuration for a standard kick
      initialisation (two-way shooting).
   3. The resulting kicked path **fully replaces** the loaded frames; no
      loaded frames are retained in the final path.

   This option is particularly useful when the available trajectory does not
   cross the relevant interface, or when you want a freshly generated,
   unbiased initial path seeded from a physically relevant region of phase
   space.

   If ``load_and_kick = False`` (the default) and no valid path can be
   assembled from the loaded data, PyRETIS raises an error.

   Default:
       The default value is ``load_and_kick = False``.

.. _user-section-initial-load-load-folder:

Keyword load_folder
...................

.. pyretis-keyword:: load_folder string

   The ``load_folder`` keyword specifies the directory containing trajectory
   data for load initialisation.  See
   :ref:`user-section-initial-load-layouts` for the two supported layouts
   (unformatted single trajectory or formatted per-ensemble subfolders).

   Default:
       The default value is ``load_folder = load``.

|

.. _user-section-initial-path-restart:

The restart method
------------------

The ``restart`` method is used to continue simulations.

By default, a restart is a strict continuation: all settings are taken from
the restart file, so the simulation proceeds exactly as if it had never been
interrupted.  Two mechanisms allow controlled deviations from this behaviour:

* **Implicit overrides** — a fixed set of parameters (step count, random seed,
  output settings, move frequencies, etc.) can always be changed in the new
  input file without any extra flag.  PyRETIS detects the change, emits a
  ``WARNING`` for each modified value, and applies it.  Everything else in the
  new input is silently ignored.  See :ref:`user-section-initial-restart-overrides`
  for the full list.

* **Flexible restart** — set ``flexible_restart = True`` to take the entire new
  input file as the settings.  This is needed for structural changes such as
  adding or removing interfaces or ensembles.  The user is then responsible for
  ensuring that the modified setup remains consistent with detailed balance.
  See :ref:`user-section-initial-flexible-restart`.

Keywords for the restart method
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For the restart method, the following keywords can be set:

.. |restart_method| replace:: :ref:`method <user-section-initial-restart-method>`

.. |flexible_restart| replace:: :ref:`flexible-restart <user-section-initial-flexible-restart>`

.. _table-keyword-restart:

.. table:: Keywords for the restart method.
   :class: table-striped table-hover

   +--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | Keyword            | Description                                                  |
   +====================+==============================================================+
   | |restart_method|   | Selects the restart method.                                  |
   +--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | |flexible_restart| | Use the new input file for structural changes on restart.    |
   +--------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+


.. _user-section-initial-restart-method:

Keyword method
..............

.. pyretis-keyword:: method restart
   :specific: yes

   The ``method`` keyword selects the restart initialization.
   The general simulation information is stored in the file
   ``pyretis.restart``. The restart file can be specified in the ``simulation``
   section with the keyword ``restart`` in the simulation input file.
   Thereafter, path and ensemble data from restart files for each ensemble
   are loaded. These restart files are named ``ensemble.restart`` and there is
   one of such file for each path ensemble, e.g. ``001/ensemble.restart``.
   Note that when doing a restart, the ``ensemble.restart`` files will be
   overwritten with new data from the continued simulation.
   Note: if an ensemble has a lower number of cycles, it is possible to
   temporaneously prioritize it until it gets the same number of cycles by
   adding the keyword ``priority_shooting = True`` in the ``retis`` section.

.. _user-section-initial-restart-overrides:

Implicit parameter overrides
............................

Even without ``flexible_restart``, a curated set of parameters can be changed
in the new input file.  Whenever a value differs from the one stored in the
restart file, PyRETIS logs a ``WARNING`` and applies the new value; all other
settings from the restart file are preserved unchanged.

The parameters that can be overridden in this way are:

* **simulation**: ``steps``, ``interfaces``, ``seed``, ``priority_shooting``
* **output**: ``screen``, ``backup``, ``trajectory-file``, ``energy-file``,
  ``order-file``, ``cross-file``, ``restart-file``, ``pathensemble-file``
* **tis**: ``freq``, ``sigma_v``, ``aimless``, ``allowmaxlength``,
  ``maxlength``, ``shooting_move``, ``shooting_moves``, ``high_accept``,
  ``n_jumps``, ``mirror_freq``, ``target_freq``, ``target_indices``,
  ``nullmoves``
* **retis**: ``swapfreq``, ``swapsimul``, ``nullmoves``

These cover parameter tuning (step count, random seed, move frequencies, output
paths) that does not alter the statistical validity of the accumulated data.
For anything beyond this list — in particular adding or removing ensembles or
changing the number of interfaces — use ``flexible_restart = True``.

.. note::

   Changing ``interfaces`` via an implicit override adjusts interface *positions*
   for the existing set of ensembles.  To change the *number* of interfaces (and
   therefore the number of ensembles) you must use ``flexible_restart = True``.

.. _user-section-initial-flexible-restart:

Keyword flexible_restart
........................

.. pyretis-keyword:: flexible_restart boolean

   If ``True``, all settings are taken from the new input file instead of from
   the restart file.  Use this when structural changes to the simulation are
   needed, for example:

   * changing interface positions or their number,
   * adding or removing path ensembles.

   In this mode no ``WARNING`` is emitted for changed values, and no whitelist
   is enforced — the new input is used as-is.

   .. warning::

      When settings are changed under ``flexible_restart``, the user is
      responsible for ensuring that the new setup is consistent with detailed
      balance.  If it is not, the ``pathensemble.txt`` files should be
      discarded before continuing.

   If some interfaces are removed, the ensemble folders must be relabeled
   manually. |pyretis| expects a continuous numbering scheme, e.g.
   ``000/``, ``001/``, ``002/``, …

   If new ensembles are added, consider setting ``priority_shooting = True``
   in the ``retis`` section to focus sampling on the new ensembles until they
   reach a comparable number of cycles.

   Default:
       The default value is ``flexible_restart = False``.
